---
layout: post
title: "TweetStream: Ruby Access to the Twitter Streaming API"
---

Twitter's "Streaming API":http://apiwiki.twitter.com/Streaming-API-Documentation is one of the most exciting developments in the Twitter API in some time. It gives you the ability to create a long-standing connection to Twitter that receives "push" updates when new tweets matching certain criteria arrive, obviating the need to constantly poll for updates. "TweetStream":http://github.com/intridea/tweetstream is a Ruby library to access the new API.

h3. Installation

Installation of TweetStream is simple, it's available as a gem on GitHub and "Gemcutter.org":http://gemcutter.org/. To install it from GitHub:

{% highlight bash %}gem sources -a http://gems.github.com
gem install intridea-tweetstream{% endhighlight %}

To install it from Gemcutter:

{% highlight bash %}gem sources -a http://gemcutter.org
gem install tweetstream{% endhighlight %}

h3. Usage

TweetStream creates a long-standing HTTP connection to Twitter, so unlike other Twitter libraries you don't simply run it once and deal with the results. Instead, you provide a block that will be yielded to with each new status that arrives. The most basic example is:

{% highlight ruby %}
require 'rubygems'
require 'tweetstream'

TweetStream::Client.new('user','pass').sample do |status|
  puts "[#{status.user.screen_name}] #{status.text}"
end{% endhighlight%}

This will provide you with a small sample snapshot of all of the updates being posted to Twitter at this moment and print them to the screen. There are also methods available to track single-word keywords as well as the updates of a specified list of user ids (integers, not screen names). You can do that like so:

{% highlight ruby %}# Track the terms 'keyword1' and 'keyword2'
TweetStream::Client.new('user','pass').track('keyword1', 'keyword2') do |status|
  puts "[#{status.user.screen_name}] #{status.text}"
end

# Track users with IDs 123 and 456
TweetStream::Client.new('user','pass').follow(123, 456) do |status|
  puts "[#{status.user.screen_name}] #{status.text}"
end{% endhighlight %}

h3. Daemonization

One of the most useful features of TweetStream is its built-in daemonization functionality. This allows you to create scripts that run in the background of your machine rather than taking up an active process. To create a daemon script, you simply use <code>TweetStream::Daemon</code> instead of <code>TweetStream::Client</code>. Here's an example:

{% highlight ruby %}require 'rubygems'
require 'tweetstream'

# The third argument is an optional process name.
TweetStream::Daemon.new('user','pass','tracker').track('keyword1','keyword2') do |status|
  # Do something like dump the status to ActiveRecord
  # or anything else you want.
end{% endhighlight %}

If you were to place the above code in a file called <code>tracker.rb</code> you could then run <code>ruby tracker.rb</code> to see a list of daemonization commands such as start, stop, or run.

TweetStream is a simple wrapper on the Streaming API, but with built-in daemonization provides powerfully flexible means of accessing the Twitter Streaming API using familiar Ruby tools. More complete code documentation is "available at rdoc.info":http://rdoc.info/projects/intridea/tweetstream.